不同的事物与事件，对人类的不同==[[目标|目的]]==而言有高低之分。

某个事物或事件的重要性的等级，在某个目的下，决定应采取的最好的行为、最好的生活方式、描述不同行为的重要性。
价值系统是一套预期性的，具有规范性的信念。（不是描述性）

> In ethics and social sciences, value denotes ==the degree of importance of something or action==, with ==the aim of determining== which actions are best to do or what way is best to live (normative ethics in ethics), or to describe the ==significance== of different actions. Value systems are ==prospective and prescriptive beliefs==; they affect the ethical behavior of a person or are the basis of their intentional activities. Often primary values are strong and secondary values are suitable for changes. What makes an action valuable may in turn depend on the ethical values of the objects it increases, decreases, or alters. An object with "ethic value" may be termed an "ethic or philosophic good" (noun sense).Values can be defined as broad preferences concerning appropriate courses of actions or outcomes. As such, values reflect a person's sense of right and wrong or what "ought" to be. "Equal rights for all", "Excellence deserves admiration",  and "People should be treated with respect and dignity" are representatives of values. Values tend to influence attitudes and behavior and these types include ethical/moral values, doctrinal/ideological (religious, political) values, social values, and aesthetic values. It is debated whether some values that are not clearly physiologically determined, such as altruism, are intrinsic, and whether some, such as acquisitiveness, should be classified as vices or virtues.
>
> [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Value%20(ethics%20and%20social%20sciences))


价值取决于目的